---
title: 'Digging Into Gutenberg'
date: ''
slug: digging-into-gutenberg
excerpt: 'Building a custom Gutenberg block from scratch — exploring the development workflow, setup, and key concepts.'
category: 'WordPress'
tags: ['gutenberg', 'react']
draft: true
---

Checking out Gutenberg development is something that's been on my list for a while now. I finally took a bit of time over the past couple of weeks to familiarize myself a bit and build a custom block.

I started out by digging into the [WPORG Gutenberg Handbook](https://wordpress.org/gutenberg/handbook/), the [gutenberg-examples](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg-examples) GitHub repo, and Zac Gordons's [Gutenberg Development course](https://javascriptforwp.com/parts/gutenburg-development/) (_highly_ recommend). Additionally, since things move along so quickly, I found myself digging through issues, commits, and PRs on the [main GitHub repo](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg).

When it came to applying what I'd learned, I wanted to start with something really basic - mainly to get a good setup sorted out that I can use as a starting point for future blocks. To start with this, I just built out a static block. After I got that set up and working with my configurations, I added a _little_ bit of dynamic content - allowing the user to pick from a set of [Thanos](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thanos) quotes and output them to the block.

This is absolutely not practical by any stretch of the imagination. I just built it out as an experiment to start getting my head wrapped around how everything pieces together. It was a lot of fun though and, in tandem, I spent a little bit of time updating a bunch of configs in my `.eslintrc` and `webpack.config.js` files - something I've been meaning to get around to.

## On getting started

I started as simple as you can get - with a static block. I recommend this approach because it allows you to just get the very basic setup nailed down and see how everything is structured, without worrying about much else. From there, once you have a base setup, it's easy to add the extra features and functionality.

I opted for the Modern JS approach (ESNext) and JSX over the ES5 approach. It's worth noting, howe that you certainly don't _have_ to take the Modern JS approach - the ES5 approach works just as well. A lot of Modern JS is still relatively new and there's likely a large chunk of people who haven't gotten into it yet so the syntax can feel foreign and confusing. Many of the resources I've seen take the ES5 approach. In fact, the `wp scaffold block` command only scaffolds out blocks with the ES5 syntax. I imagine this will change at some point. Either way, it's really nice to have both of those options available to lower the barrier to entry!

## Getting set up

When setting up out project structure for building out a custom block, the first thing we need to do is enqueue our block JS in a main plugin file. We do this in pretty much the same way you would enqueue your JS in any other WP plugin, however there are some new additions for doing so in the context of Gutenberg.

We then register our block in the JS file using a `registerBlockType` function. Because there can be a lot that goes into the settings parameter of this function when building complex blocks, you may choose to break things out into smaller modules or components and `import` them into the main block JS file.

Finally, we want to enqueue our block CSS. We could do this at a higher level for our entire plugin where all of our blocks will share some styles or we can or we can do per-block styling and pull in those styles specific to a block. I, personally, prefer the latter approach.

## Enqueuing Block JS and CSS

There are two hooks available to us to enqueue styles and scripts into the Gutenberg editor and onto the front end, where the blocks will be displayed into the content.

**enqueue\_block\_editor\_assets**

- Hooks into editor only: will only be run in admin area when Gutenberg editor is loaded

- For main block JS that registers our block, as we only need or block registration to show up in the editor

- For editor only block CSS overrides - if there are specific aspects of the editing experience that need styles not relevant to the front end.

**enqueue\_block\_assets**

- Hooks into editor and front end. One of the goals of blocks is that you want it to look as similar as possible in the admin as it will on the front end. This is accomplished by applying the same styles to both the editor and front end.

- For main block CSS

- We don't really enqueue JS with this hook because it's rare that you would want to have JS run in the editor _and_ on the front end but if you need some custom JS that only runs in the context of the front end, you can use this hook with a `! is_admin()` check to load the JS on the front end only. You probably don't need to do this very often but it's good to be aware of, if you run into a case where you do need it.

When you run your `wp_enqueue_script` and `wp_enqueue_style` functions, note the third parameter, which is an array that lists out the dependencies of your block. For example:

```
function gutentitan_enqueue_block_editor_assets() {
  wp_enqueue_script(
    'gutentitan-quotes',
    plugins_url( 'build/block.js', __FILE__ ),
    array( 'wp-blocks', 'wp-i18n', 'wp-element' ),
    filemtime( plugin_dir_path( __FILE__ ) . 'build/block.js' )
  );
}
add_action( 'enqueue_block_editor_assets', 'gutentitan_enqueue_block_editor_assets' );

function gutenberg_enqueue_block_assets() {
  wp_enqueue_style(
    'gutentitan-quotes',
    plugins_url( 'build/style.css', __FILE__ ),
    array( 'wp-blocks' ),
    filemtime( plugin_dir_path( __FILE__ ) . 'build/style.css' )
  );
}
add_action( 'enqueue_block_assets', 'gutenberg_enqueue_block_assets' );
```

This won't ensure that these are loaded but will insure that your JS is loaded _after_ this code.

That's really about all of the PHP you need for your custom block (aside from your WordPress Plugin header). The rest of the code is all JavaScript!

## Registering the Block

The `registerBlockType` function is the JavaScript function used to create/register custom blocks in Gutenberg. It is made available in the global scope via the `wp.blocks` object.

The function takes two parameters:

- Name - this includes 2 parts:
    - the namespace (will be unique to the plugin or a subset of blocks, all lowercase, separated by hyphen)
    
    - the actual block name. This does have to be unique because we may need to reference it later within WP.

- Settings - this is an object that contains a bunch of settings configurations.

A very simple example of this function in action is as follows.

## Attributes

## Edit and Save

## Gutentitan

Here's the [GitHub repo](https://github.com/danielwrobert/gutentitan), if you want to view the source code. You're free to set up the plugin and test it out on a WP install but, as I mentioned, it isn't super useful and I just created it as an experiment to get a good base starting point for more complex/useful blocks.

If you check out the repo, notice the alternate branch. This branch has a Webpack config using Laravel Mix. Laravel Mix is a nice abstraction layer on top of Webpack, making setup really quick and simple. Personally, I prefer the fine-grained control of a custom config but I do often find myself reaching for Laravel Mix when I want a quick drop-in solution.
